Mesocanonical ensemble Monte Carlo (#4757)
lammps/lammps: doc/src/fix_mcemc.rst

.. index:: fix mcemc

fix mcemc command
=================

Syntax
""""""

.. code-block:: LAMMPS

   fix ID group-ID mcemc N X M type seed T vgauge ntotal displace keyword values ...

* ID, group-ID are documented in :doc:`fix <fix>` command
* mcemc = style name of this fix command
* N = invoke this fix every N steps

> * X = average number of GCMC exchanges to attempt every N steps

Reviewer: Shouldn't this say MCEMC?

* M = average number of MC moves to attempt every N steps
* type = atom type (1-Ntypes or type label) for inserted atoms (must be 0 if mol keyword used)
* seed = random # seed (positive integer)
* T = temperature of the ideal gas reservoir (temperature units)

> * vgauge = gauge volume for GCMC exchanges (volume units)

Reviewer: same as above

* ntotal = total number of atoms in the system (positive integer)
* displace = maximum Monte Carlo translation distance (length units)
* zero or more keyword/value pairs may be appended to args

  .. parsed-literal::

     keyword = *mol*, *region*, *maxangle*, *full_energy*, *charge*, *group*, *grouptype*, *intra_energy*, *tfac_insert*, or *overlap_cutoff*
       *mol* value = template-ID
         template-ID = ID of molecule template specified in a separate :doc:`molecule <molecule>` command
       *mcmoves* values = Patomtrans Pmoltrans Pmolrotate
         Patomtrans = proportion of atom translation MC moves
         Pmoltrans = proportion of molecule translation MC moves
         Pmolrotate = proportion of molecule rotation MC moves
       *rigid* value = fix-ID
         fix-ID = ID of :doc:`fix rigid/small <fix_rigid>` command
       *shake* value = fix-ID
         fix-ID = ID of :doc:`fix shake <fix_shake>` command
       *region* value = region-ID

>          region-ID = ID of region where GCMC exchanges and MC moves are allowed

Reviewer: more

       *maxangle* value = maximum molecular rotation angle (degrees)

>        *full_energy* = compute the entire system energy when performing GCMC exchanges and MC moves

Reviewer: one more

       *grouptype* values = type group-ID
         type = atom type (1-Ntypes or type label)
         group-ID = group-ID for inserted atoms (string)
       *intra_energy* value = intramolecular energy (energy units)
       *tfac_insert* value = scale up/down temperature of inserted atoms (unitless)
       *overlap_cutoff* value = maximum pair distance for overlap rejection (distance units)
       *max* value = Maximum number of atoms allowed in the fix group (and region)
       *min* value = Minimum number of atoms allowed in the fix group (and region)

Examples
""""""""

.. code-block:: LAMMPS

   fix 2 gas mcemc 10 1000 1000 2 29494 298.0 1200 100 0.01
   fix 3 water mcemc 10 100 100 0 3456543 3.0 1200 100 mol my_one_water maxangle 180 full_energy
   fix 4 my_gas mcemc 1 10 10 1 123456543 300.0 1200 100 1.0 region disk

Description
"""""""""""

This fix performs mesocanonical Monte Carlo (MCEMC) also known as gauge cell
simulation by exchanging particles with a finite volume ideal gas reservoir (gauge cell) at
the same temperature as the system as discussed in :ref:`(Parashar) <Parashar>`.
It also attempts Monte Carlo moves (translations and rotations) of particles

> within the simulation cell. Specific use of this fix is to compute adsorption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
within the simulation cell. Specific uses of this fix are to compute the adsorption
```

> isotherm in porous materials, or computing vapor-liquid equilibrium of fluids.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
isotherm in porous materials, or to compute the vapor-liquid equilibrium of fluids.
```

This fix is complementary to the :doc:`fix gcmc <fix_gcmc>` command, which performs
grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) by exchanging particles with an infinite
chemical potential reservoir. MCEMC and GCMC give identical adsorption
isotherms for microporous materials. But for large pores (> 2 nm), GCMC gives
a hysteretic adsorption/desorption isotherm, while MCEMC gives a reversible S-
shaped van der Waals type isotherm, as discussed in :ref:`(Parashar) <Parashar>`.

> MCEMC isotherm spans the stable and metastable states, while GCMC samples only the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MCEMC isotherm spans the stable and metastable states, while GCMC samples only the
```

> stable states. The MCEMC is a middle ground between the grand canonical ensemble

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stable states. The MCEMC method is a middle ground between the grand canonical ensemble
```

which permits unlimited fluctuations, and the canonical ensemble, which

> considers a close system. The MCEMC simulations generate the adsorption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
considers a closed system. MCEMC simulations generate adsorption
```

In GCMC, the chemical potential of the infinite reservoir is imposed on the system
using the exchange move, while in MCEMC, the gauge cell (which is assumed to be an ideal gas)
is used to measure the chemical potential of the system. In GCMC, the only input is
the chemical potential of the infinite reservoir and one can obtain the number of particles in the system
as the average number of particles observed in the system. In MCEMC, there are two inputs:
Ntotal and vgauge. From these two inputs, the chemical potential (and hence fugacity) of the system
is calculated based on ideal gas chemical potential in the gauge cell. Whereas, the number of
particles adsorbed is simply the average number of particles observed in the system. Note that
the choice of Ntotal and vgauge is not arbitrary. The recommendation is to choose Vgauge such that
the gauge cell should contain roughly 70-80 particles for good statistics. Having a GCMC simulated
isotherm a priori can help in determining Ntotal.

The *full_energy* option means that the fix calculates the total
potential energy of the entire simulated system, instead of just
the energy of the part that is changed. The total system

> energy before and after the proposed GCMC exchange or MC move

Reviewer: ```suggestion
energy before and after the proposed MCEMC exchange or MC move
```
